#Unpredictable readings

In an article on the concept of aurality in the Middle Ages (“Aurality” in _Middle English_, 2007), Joyce Coleman suggests a comparison between the codex book and the modern DVD. During an occasion of entertainment, after having decided on a suitable volume, the medieval household would gather around a designated reader (the “prelector”), who would start reading aloud from it. The – potentially illiterate – audience would probably often engage in the presentation, either anticipating or suggesting favorite excerpts from the narrative or from the poem, thus modulating a collective experience that would be different every time. According to Joyce Coleman, aurality would count for at least half of the reading experience of the Middle Ages. With a striking frequency, therefore, the codex functioned as just one of the many prerequisites of an elaborate interaction: by itself insufficient, this commodity required both an interpreter and a listener in order to work properly – not differently from a DVD and its dedicated player. The ability of the “prelector” often determined the pleasantness of the entire session.

Katherine Hayles insists on the material insufficiency of the electronic hypertext as one of the essential features defining its medium. Differently from a codex, an electronic text cannot exist without a device that transforms its illegible latent code into visible interactive forms. But, as the example of aurality proves, the technology of the codex has a long history of unpredictable interactions, often culturally acknowledged among its users and informing deeply the arrangement of the works produced. Boccaccio’s _Decameron_, one of the most popular books of the fourteenth century, is clearly designed as an aural hypertext. Its short stories can be read in any order, and they are linked among them by different sets of connections (the topic of the day, the identity of each storyteller, the subgenre indicated by the position within each day); its narrative frame, in which ten young noblemen ceaselessly tell stories to each other, mirrors closely its actual collective purpose.

The unstable experience of the _Decameron_, fluctuating between the equally rewarding experiences of either skipping from tale to tale or following its indubitably careful linear development, displaces the “depth” that we usually envision as residing somewhere beyond the flat surface of the page. Instead of being concealed behind it, this “depth” is positioned before the written word, in the countless mutations of its readings.
