#Meaningful serpent, meaningless rhizome

> Mon cher ami, je vous envoie un petit ouvrage dont on ne pourrait pas dire, sans injustice, qu'il n'a ni queue ni tête, puisque tout, au contraire, y est à la fois tête et queue, alternativement et réciproquement. Considérez, je vous prie, quelles admirables commodités cette combinaison nous offre à tous, à vous, à moi et au lecteur. Nous pouvons couper où nous voulons, moi ma rêverie, vous le manuscrit, le lecteur sa lecture; car je ne suspends pas la volonté rétive de celui-ci au fil interminable d'une intrigue superflue. Enlevez une vertèbre, et les deux morceaux de cette tortueuse fantaisie se rejoindront sans peine. Hachez-la en nombreux fragments, et vous verrez que chacun peut exister à part. Dans l'espérance que quelques-uns de ces tronçons seront assez vivants pour vous plaire et vous amuser, j'ose vous dédier le serpent tout entier.

> (http://baudelaire.litteratura.com/pop/texte/138-preface.html)

How does Baudelaire's collection of _Petit poèmes en prose_ differ from the project of _A thousand plateaus_? The two books seem to involve analogous reading practices: like one of Baudelaire's compositions, a “plateau can be read starting anywhere and can be related to any other plateau” (22); like the snake evoked by the poet's words in the preface, Deleuze and Guattari's book is compared a living organism, capable of endless reorganizations of its structure – “any point of a rhizome can be connected to anything other, and it must be” (7). _Le Spleen de Paris_ possesses similar faculties of autotrophy and parthenogenesis, resulting in the pictured mythological fusion between an ouroboros and a hydra; it shifts from the inorganic simplicity of its dissection, into “morceaux” or “tronçons”, to the organic intelligence of its prodigious recomposition, into the “vertèbre” of a “tortueuse fantaisie”. Both texts require this process of fragmentation and re-assemblage to be fully understood.

Nevertheless, despite the similarities, Baudelaire carefully specifies that, although each portion of his “petit ouvrage” is at the same time its head and its tail (“à la fois tête et queue”), it can be so only “in turns and reciprocally” (“alternativement et réciproquement”): each permutation of the book, produced by a distinct interaction with its reader, must present one head and one tail. Each permutation, therefore, must emulate the same “serpentine” structure, consisting of a linear succession of discrete pieces. This is, of course, a fundamental difference. Baudelaire's work requires a syntax; meaning functions positionally; although not intrinsic to the singular pieces, a hierarchy – with a distinguishable head and a tail – is intrinsic to their comprehension. The number of connections is virtually limitless, but strictly limited in each instantiation. The connections of rhizomes are instead permanently active; like with the highly dense networks described by Moretti and by Weingart, their unbound accessibility coincides with meaninglessness.
