#Completion Bar and Gamification

According to Benkler and Nissenbaum, the users of SETI@Home are mostly driven by an altruistic, globally committed motivation, which, they feel, in the long run would reinforce a common practice of disinterested virtue. For these two writers, as for Monroy-Herández and Mako Hill in their paper about the young community of Scratch remixers, communities based on a collaborative effort, like Wikipedia or Slashdot, succeed because they provide the user with the sympathetic reward of personal gratitude and esteem, and not through a hierarchical mechanism of fear and benevolence from a superior authority. Devices for human recognition, such as digital comment boxes, communal preference pools, and standardized expressions of admiration, would encourage efficiency much better than any automatic system, as these cases would exemplify.

I think, however, that automation is a primary component for each one of these examples of collective endeavor. It is the crucial condition for their ultimate appeal – a transparent quantification of labor. I have been fiddling with GitHub for less than a week now, but I already know for certain that the “contributions” table at the center of my personal page is already my favorite feature. At the end of each  session, when I commit and push my daily activity into one of my repositories,  one small square has lit up in green: the more intense its hue, the more the work that I have done. It is at the same time an immediate gratification and a reminder of the work that still needs to be done. It is a completion bar, of the sort found in video games, crowdfunding pages, educational apps, and in the screensaver through which SETI@Home elaborates its data.

!(SETI@Home's Completion Bar)[http://seticlassic.ssl.berkeley.edu/screensaver/images/data_analysis2-2.0.gif]
